The wonderful life and surprising adventures of ... Robinson Crusoe [by D. Defoe. An abridgment of pt. 1].
William Darton
1819

ADVENTURES

OF

ROBINSON CRUSOE.

I WAS born of a good family in the city of York, where my father, who was a native of Bremen, settled, after his having got a handsome estate by merchandise. My heart was very early filled with rambling thoughts, and though, when I grew up, my father persuaded me to settle to some business, while my mother used the tenderest entreaties, yet nothing could prevail upon me to lay aside my desire of going to sea. I at length resolved to gratify my roving disposition, notwithstanding the uneasiness my father and mother shewed ai my leaving them.





On the 1st of September 1651, I went on board a ship for London, and, without letting my father know the rout I had taken, set sail; but no sooner was the ship ont of the Humber, than the wind began to blow, and the sea to rise in a most terrible manner. Having never been at sea before, I was extremely sick, and my mind was filled with terror. The next day the wind abated, and my companions laughed at my fears, and with a bowl of punch made me half drunk, and thus drowned my repentance and reflections. The weather continued calm several days, and we went into Yarmouth roads, where we cast anchor. After riding here four or five days, the wind blew very hard till the eighth day in the morning, when it still increased, and we had all bands at work to strike our topmasts, and at last cast our sheet anchor.

It now blew a terrible storm ; I began to see terror in the faces even of the sea





men themselves; and as the master passed by me, I heard him say softly to himself, ' Lord be merciful to us, we shall be all lost/

I cannot express the horror of mind with which I was seized; I was in ten times more tremor on account of slighting my former convictions than even at -death itself. The storm still increased, and I saw the master, the boatswain, and several others at prayers, expecting every moment the ship would go to the bottom. One of the men cried out we had sprung a leak, upon which all hands were called to the pump, but the water gained upon us, and it was apparent that the ship weuld founder; the storm however beginning to abate, the master fired guns for help, and a ship which had rode it out just a head of us, came near with the utmost hazard, venturing their lives to save ours; our men casting a rope over the •tern, they, after much hazard, got hold of it, and we with great difficulty got to land, and walked to Yarmouth. On my arrival in that city, I contracted an acquaintance with the master of a ship who had been on the coast of Guinea, and was resolved to go again; he taking a fancy to me, told me I should have liberty of trading for myself. Encouraged by this offer, and the assistance of some of my relations, with whom I still corresponded, I raised £40, which I laid out in such toys and trifles as my friend the captain directed me. I got a competent knowledge of the mathematics, navigation, and how to take an observation. In a word, this voyage made me both a sailor and a merchant, for my adventure yielded me in London, at my return, .£300.





I now set up for a Guinea trader, and my friend dying soon after his arrival, I resolved to go the same voyage again in the same vessel, with one who was his mate in the former voyage, and had now





the command of the ship. This was one of the most unhappy voyages ever made, for as we were steering about the Canary Islands and the African shore, we were surprised in the morning by a rover of Salee, who gave chase to us with all the sail she could make. We, finding that the pirate gained upon us, and would come up with us, prepared to fight; our ship having twelve guns, and the pirate eighteen. About three in the afternoon she came up with us, and a very smart engagement ensued; but we were obliged to submit, and were all carried prisoners jnto Salee, a port belonging to the Moors.

My master having the long-boat of our English ship, had a little cabin built in the middle of it like a barge. In this pleasure boat he frequently went a fishing; and as I was dexterous at catching fish, he never went without me. One day he appointed to go out with two or three Moors pf distinction, and he had sent over-night a larger store of provisions than usual, and ordered me to get ready two or three fusils of powder and shot, for that they designed to have sport at the fowling as well as fishing. At this moment the hopes of deliverance darted into my thoughts, and I resolved to furnish myself for a voyage.





Every thing being prepared, we sailed. out of the port to fish; but purposely catching none, I told Muley that we must stand further off, which he agreed to, and I having the helm, ran the boat a league out further, and then brought to, as if I would fish, when, giving the boy the helm, I stepped forward, and stooping behind the Moor, took him by surprise, and tossed him overboard; he rose immediately, and called me to take him in, but fetching one of the fowling pieces, I pre* sented it, and told him that if he came near I would shoot him, and as the sea was calm, he might easily reach the shore.





So he tamed about, and I make no doubt but he reached it with ease.

I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury. and said to him, Xury, if you will be faithful to me, I will make you a great man; but if you will not, I must throw you into the sea too. The boy smiled, and spoke so innocently, that I could not mistrust him.

About ten days after, as I was steering out to sea, in order to double a cape, on a sudden Xury called out in a fright, Master, Master, a ship! I jumped out of the cabin, and saw that it was a Portuguese vessel. On my coming near they asked me what I was, in Portuguese, Spanish, and French; but I understood none of them; at last a Scotch sailor called to me, and I answered I was an Englishman, and had made my escape from the Moors of Saliee. I offered all that I had to the captain of the ship, but he would take nothing from me, and told me that all that





1 had should be delivered to me when we came to the Brazils. We had a very good voyage to the Brazils, and the good captain recommended me to an honest man who had a plantation and a sngar-house, with whom I lived, and learned the planting and making of sugar; after which I took a piece of land, and became a planter myself. Had I continued in the station I was now in, I might have been happy, but my fellow planters prevailed on me to make a trial of purchasing negroes on the coast of Guinea. We fitted out a ship, and made sail with the hopes of purchasing slaves to assist in our plantations; we had very good -weather for twelve days, but after we had crossed the Line, a violent hurricane drove us quite out of our reckoning. In this distress one of our men called out " Land!" but the ship struck against a sand bank. We took to the boat, and after we had rowed a league and a half, a wave came rolling a-stern of





us, and overset the boat at once, so that out of fifteen none escaped bat myself. I got upon my feet and made towards the shore, and got to land, clambering up the clifls of the shore, and sat me down upon the grass. Being much fatigued, I got up into a tree, and slept comfortably till the morning.

When I awoke it was broad day, and the storm abated ; but what surprised me most was, that in the night the ship had been lifted from the land by the swelling of the tide, and driven almost as far as the place where I landed, and I saw that if we had all staid on board we had been all safe. I swam to the ship, and found she was bulged, and had a great deal of water in the hold : but to my great joy, saw that all the provisions were dry; and being well disposed to eat, I filled my pockets, and eat as I went about other things. I found several spare yards and planks, with which 1 made a raft. I





emptied three of the seamen's chests, and let them down upon the raft, and filled them with bread, some dried goats1 flesh, and three Dutch cheeses. I also let down the carpenter's chest, two fowling-pieces, two pistols, with some powder, and two rusty swords, all which I placed on my raft, and after much labour got it safely landed. My first raft being too unwieldy, I swam to the ship and made another ; on which I placed three bags of nails and spikes, some hatchets, a grindstone, two iron crows, several muskets, and another fowling-piece, two barrels of musket bullets, a large bag of small shot, all the men's clothes I could find, a hammock and some bedding, and to my great comfort brought all to land. After I had made five or six of these voyages, and though I had nothing more to expect from the ship worth taking, I found a great hogshead of bread, three large runlets of rum, a box of fine sugar, a barrel





of fine flour, three dozen of good knives and forks. I then went in search of a place where to fix my dwelling.

Before I set up my tent, I drew a half circle before a hollow place, which ex. tended about twenty yards, and drove large piles into the ground, sharpened at the top, and the entrance I made by a short ladder to go over the top, and when I was in, I lifted it over after me, so that I was perfectly secure.

In the midst of my labours, when I was rummaging amongst my things, I found a little bag with a few husks of corn in it, and shook it by the side of my fortification: but how great was my astonishment when I saw ten or twelve ears of barley springing up; with this barley there came up a few stalks of rice, and these were of more worth to me than all the gold in the world.

I then took a view of the island, and at about two miles distant from my habitation, found some fine savannahs, and a little further a variety of fruit, melons upon the ground, and the trees spread over, and covered with clusters of grapes. I was so enamoured with this place, that I built a bower, fenced by a double hedge ; and this country house, as I called it, cost me two months labour, but the rainy season coming on, I was obliged to retreat to my old one, taking with me grapes, which were now become fine raisins of the sun.





When my corn was ripe, I made me a scythe with a sword, and cut off the ears, which I rubbed out with my hands. At the end of the harvest, I guessed that I had a bushel of rice, and two bushels of barley. I kept all this for seed, and bore the want of bread with patience.

When I came to make bread I had innumerable wants. I wanted a mill to grind it, sieves to dress it, yeast and salt to make it into bread, and an oven to





bake it. However, I had six months ia contrive all these things in. 1 made some misshapen pots of clay, that all broke in the sun except two, which I cased in wicker work; but I succeeded bet' ter in little pans, flat dishes, and pitchers, which the sun baked surprisingly hard; but they would not bear the fire so as to hold any liquid, and I wanted one to boil my meat.

Certainly a stoic would have smiled to have seen me at dinner; there was my royal majesty, an absolute prince and ruler of my kingdom, attended by my dutiful subjects, whom, if I pleased, 1 could either hang, draw, quarter, give liberty, or take it away. When I dined, I seemed a king, eating alone, none daring presume to do so till I had done. Poll was the only person permitted to talk with me. My old, but faithful dog, now growing exceeding crazy, continually sat at my right hand; while my two cats sat on each side of the table, expecting a bit from my hand, as a principal mark of my royal favour. Yet these were not the cats I had brought from the ship ; they had been dead long before, and interred near my habitation by my own hands ; bnt one of them, as I suppose, generating with a wild cat, these were a couple I had made tame; whereas the rest ran into the woods, and grew so impndent as to return and plunder me of my stores, till such time as I shot a great many, and the rest left me with this attendance. One thing more indeed concerned me, the want of my boat. I knew not which way to get round the island. I resolved one time to go along the shore by land to her; but had any one in England met such a figure, it would either affright them, or make them burst into laughter.





One day after I had dressed my dinner, I went to put out my fire, and found





* piece of one of ray earthen-ware vessels burnt as hard as a stone, and as red as a tile; this taught me to burn my pipkins, and I soon wanted for no sort of earthenWare ; but when I found that I had made a pot which would bear the lire, I had hardly patience to stay till it was cold, bfore I set it on with a piece of a kid, in order to make me some broth, which answered tolerably well.

I used to burn my earthen-ware in a cave which I found in the wood, and which I made convenient for that purpose ; but the principal cause that first brought me here, was to make charcoal, so that I might bake and dress my bread and meat, without any danger. While I was cutting down some wood for this purpose, I perceived a cavity behind a very thick branch of underwood. Curious to look into it, I got to its mouth, and found it sufficient for me to stand upright in it. But when I entered and took a further view, two rolling shining eyes, like flaming stars, seemed to dart themselves at me, so that I made all the haste out that I could, not knowing whether it was a savage, or a monster that had taken his residence in that place. On recovering a little from my surprise, I resumed all the courage I had, and taking up a flaming firebrand, (see frontispiece) in I rushed again ; when not having proceeded above three steps, I was more affrighted than before; for I heard a very loud sigh; like that of a human creature in the greatest agony, succeeded with a broken noise, resembling words half expressed, and then a broken sigh again. Stepping back, thought I to myself, am I got into some enchanted place, such as are reported to contain miserable captives, till death puts an end to their sorrow ? It struck me with a cold sweat; but again, trusting God's protection, I proceeded forward, and by the light of my fire-brand, perceived it to be a monstrous he-goat, lying on the ground, gasping for life, and dying of mere old age. When at first I stirred him, thinking to drive him out, he strove to get upon his feet, but was not able ; so I left him there, to fright anyone from venturing into the cave.





At the furthermost part of the cave I observed a sort of entrance, but so low as to oblige me to creep upon my hands and knees to get through, but on advancing I found that it rose in height about twenty feet, and appeared, from the reflection of the light I carried with me, to be a grotto adorned with diamonds and other precious stones. I found it dry and comfortable, therefore determined to make it my principal magazine.

While these things were doing, my thoughts ran many times upon the land I had seen, and I began to make myself a canoe; the most preposterous enterprise that ever man in his senses undertook. I felled a great cedar, about five feet in diameter next the root, but when the impossibility of launching this heavy thing came into my mind, I gave myself this foolish answer : Let me but once make it, ril warrant Fll get it along when it it done. I made it big enough to carry twenty-five men; but all my devices to get it into the water failed me, for I could no more stir it than I could the Island. I then determined, since I could not bring my canoe to the water, that I should bring the water to the canoe, and began to dig; but when I calculated the time this canal would take in making, I found that I could not accomplish it in less than twelve years, and therefore gave it over, determining to enjoy what -I had, without repining for what I could not get.





I had at length a great mind to go to the point of the island to see bow the





shore lay, and resolved fo travel thither by land. And now, reader, I will give you a short sketch of the figure I made. 1 had a great high shapeless cap, made of a goat's skin, a jacket with the skirts coming down to the middle of my thighs, and a pair of open knee'd breeches of the same, with the goat's hair hanging to the middle of my leg. Stockings and shoes I had none ; but I had a pair of somethings, I scarce know what to call them, to slip over my legs like spatterdashes. Under my arm hung two pouches for shot and powder; on my back I carried a basket, on my shoulder a gun, and over my head a great clumsy goat's skin umbrella. My beard was cut short, except what grew on my upper lip ; but as for my figure, as I had few to observe me, it was no matter of consequence.

In this figure I went on my new jour ney, and was out five or six days. In one of my excursions I was exceedingly surprised with the print of a man's naked foot on the shore, which was plain to be seen on the sand. I stood like one thunderstruck; I listened, I looked around, but I could hear nothing, nor see any thing. I went upon a rising ground to look farther; I walked backward and forward on the shore, but I could see only that one impression. I went to look at it again; how it came there I knew not; but I hurried home to my fortifications, looking behind me every two or three steps, and fancied every tree, bush, and stump to be a man. I had no sleep that night, but my terror gradually wore off, and I ventured down to take measure of the foot by my own, but I found it much larger. This filled me again with ridiculous whimsies, and when I went home, I began to double my fortifications planted my seven mnskets on carriages, in the manner of cannon, and was at the expense of as iafU





nite deal of labour, purely from ray apprehensions of this print of a foot.

Rambling more to the western point one day than ever I had done before, I was presently convinced that the seeing the print of a man's foot was not such a strange thing in the island as I had imagined, [for, on approaching the shore, I was perfectly confounded and amazed, nor is it possible to express the horror I felt, at seeing the shore spread with the skulls, hands, feet, and other bones of human bodies, and particularly a place, where, as I supposed, there had been a fire made, and a circle dug in the earth for the savage wretches to sit down to their inhuman feasts, on the bodies of their fellow-creatures.

I had now been twenty-two years in the island, and was so naturalized to the place, that had I been secure as to the savages, I then fancied I could have been contented to have staid in it till I had died of mere old age.





One morning very early, I saw five canoes of the savages on shore. I clambered up the hill, and, by the help of my perspective, discovered no less than thirty dancing round a fire. I soon after saw two miserable wretches dragged out of the boats, one of whom was immediately knocked down, but the other starting from them, ran with incredible swiftness along the sands towards me- I confess I was horribly frightened when I saw him come my way, imagining he would be pursued by the whole body; however, I kept my station, and quite lost my apprehension when I found but three followed him. He greatly out-ran them, and was in a fair way of escaping them all, when, coming to a creek, he plunged into it, landed, and ran as swift as before. Of the three that followed, but two entered the water, the other returning back. I hastily fetched my guns from the foot of my ladder, and, taking a short





cut down the hill, I clapped myself in the way betwixt the pursued and the pursuers-; then rushing at once on the foremost, knocked him down with the stock of my piece; the other stopped as if frightened, but when I advanced towards him, I perceived he was fitting his bow to shoot me, upon which I shot him dead directly. The poor savage who had fled, was so terrified at the noise of my piece, though he saw his enemies fallen, that he stood stock still, but seemed rather inclined to fly than come forwards. However, when I gave him signs of encouragement, he came nearer, kneeling down every ten or twelve steps. I then took him away to my cave at the farther part of the island. Here I gave him bread, and a bunch of raisins to eat, and a draught of water, which he wanted much; and having refreshed him, I made signs for him to lie down on some rice straw, which the poor creature did, and soon went to sleep.





After he had slept about half an hoar, he waked again, and came running to me in the enclosure just by. Then kneeling down again, he made all possible signs of thankfulness, subjection, and submission. I began to speak to him, and to teach him to speak to me ; and first made him know that his name should be Friday, which was the day wherein I saved his life. I taught him to say Master, and let Jiim know that was to be my name. The next day I gave Lim clothes, at which he seemed pleased.

Having now more courage, and consequently more curiosity, I took my man Friday with me, and marched to the place where his enemies had been. When we came there, my blood ran cold in my veins; the place was covered with human bones, and the ground dyed with blood ; great pieces of flesh were left here and there half eaten, mangled and scorched. We saw three skulls, five hands, and the





bones of three or four legs and feet and Friday, by his signs, made me understand that they brought over four prisoners to feast upon, and that three of them were eaten up; that he, pointing to himself, was the fourth, and that they had been conquered and taken in war. I caused Friday to collect the remains of this horrid carnage, then to light a fire, and burn them to ashes. When this was done, we returned to our castle.

I was now entered into the 27th year of my captivity, and intended soon to set sail, when one morning I bid Friday go to the sea shore to see if he could find a turtle; but he had not l°ng been gone, when he came running back like one who felt not the ground on which he trod, and before I had time to speak, cried, O Master! 0 Master.! 0 sorrow! 0 bad! What's the matter, Friday, said I? O yonder, there, said he, one, two, three! Well, Friday, said I, do not be frightened ; he was, however, terribly scared, imagining; that they were oome to look for him, and would cat him in pieces, and eat him.





I then took my perspective glass and went up to the side of the hill, when I saw twenty-one savages, three prisoners, and three canoes. I bid him softly bring me word what they were doing ; he did so, and coming back immediately, told me they were all about the fire, eating the flesh of one of their prisoners, and that a bearded man lay bound upon the sand, whom he said they would kill next. The news fired my soul, and filled me with horror, and goinrt to the tree, I plainly saw a white man clothed, lying on the beech with his hands and feet tied with flags. I had not a moment to lose, for nineteen of the horrid wretches sat huddled together on the ground, and the other two were stooping down to untie the Christian in order to murder him. Now, Friday, said I, do as you see me do. I laid the muskets down and took up one, and then we both fired; we then fired again, till seventeen of them were killed ; and four of them getting into a canoe got out to sea.





I resolved to pursue them, lest they should return with a greater force to destroy us, and ran to a canoe, calling to Friday to follow me ? but I was no sooner in the canoe than I found another poor creature lying there alive, bound hand and foot; I immediately cut the twisted flags, and seeing that he had been bound so tight that he was almost dead, I gave him a dram, and ordered Friday to tell him of his deliverance; but when the poor fellow looked in his face, and heard him speak, it would have moved any one to tears, to have seen how he kissed, embraced, hugged him, cried, danced, sung, and then cried again. It was some time before I could make him tell what was the matter, but when he came a little to himself he said it was his own dear father. He then sat down by him, held the old man's head close to his bosom, and chafed his arms and ancles, which were stiff with binding.





The white man, who was a Spaniard, expressed the utmost gratitude for his deliverance, gave me an account of his shipwreck, and the situation of his companions ; when we resolved that Friday's father and the Spaniard should go in the boat to fetch them. over.

About eight days after they were gone, Friday wakened me one morning by crying out, Master, they are come ! I dressed, and hastened to the top of the hill, and plainly discovered an English ship lying at anchor. At first I felt in my mind a tumult of joy, which was soon turned into fear; for, though I knew them to be my countrymen, I had reason to dread them as enemies.





I drefsed. and hastened to the top of the hiD. and plainly discovered an ^ENGLISH. ship 1 living- at anchor.

see pape 3o.





They ran the boat ashore on the beech, and eleven men landed, three of them unarmed, who, by their gestures, seemed to be prisoners; and one of them I could perceive using the most passionate gestures of entreaty, affliction, and despair, while the two others, though their grief seemed less extravagant, appeared pleading for mercy. At this instant I saw a villain lift up his arms to kill one of the prisoners, but he did not strike him. The men having left the prisoners and gone into the woods, I went up to them with my man Friday, and said to them in Spanish, What are you, Gentlemen? they started at the noise, but prepared to fly. I then said in English, Gentlemen, perhaps you may have a friend near you, whom you would little expect. Tell me your case. I was commander of that ship, replied one of the prisoners; my men have mutinied against me; and if they do not murder me, they intend to leave me and these two gentlemen ashore in this desolate place; they are but in that thicket, and I tremble for fear they shall have seen yon, and heard us speak. Having concerted matters with the captain, and armed ourselves, we went to the sailors; and the captain reserving his own piece, the two men shot one of the villains dead, and wounded another. He who was wounded cried out for help, and I coming up, gave orders for sparing their lives, on condition of their being bound hand and foot while they staid in the island.





A little after, another boat with ten men and fire arms approached the shore. We had a full view of them as they came; the captain told me three of them were peaceable fellows, but the rest were desperate wretches. Having formed an ambuscade, I ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their hands and feet, that they might not be seen, and to get very Mf (hem before they fired ; but one of the principal ringleaders of the mutiny, with two of the crew, came towards us, and the captain was so eager at having him in his power, that he let fly, killed him and another on the spot; the third ran for it. I immediately advanced with my whole army, upon which Will Atkins, one of the ringleaders, called out, For God's sake, captain, spare my life, the rest are as bad as I. The captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion, and trust to the governor's mercy, upon which they all submitted.





It was now determined to seize the ship, which, with the assistance of the faithful part of the crew, the captain effected thus: Atkins, and two of th« worst were sent fast bound to the cave, and the rest committed to my bower, i sent the captain to tamper with them, in the governor's name, offering them pardon, if they would assist him in recovering the ship. Upon which they all agreed to stand by him till their last drop of blood. They were all released on these assurances; and then the captain repaired the other boat, making his passenger captain, with four men well armed ; while his mate, himself, and five men more, went in the other. By midnight they came within call of the ship, when the captain ordered Robinson to hail her, and tell them, that with great difficulty they had found the men at last. But while they were discoursing, the captain, his mate, and the rest entered, and knocked down the second mate and carpenter, secured those that were upon deck, by putting them under hatches, while the other boat's crew entered, and securing the forecastle, broke into the round-house, where the mate, after some resistance, shot the pirate captain through the head ; upon which all the rest yielded





\

themselves prisoners. Thus the ship being recovered, the joyful signal was fired.

When I saw my deliverance thus put into my hands, I was ready to sink with surprise; I was not able to answer one word, but a flood of tears brought me to myself, and a little while after I recovered my speech. I then in my turn embraced him as my deliverer, and we rejoiced together. Having brought the prisoners before me, I asked them what they had to say in their own defence, telling them I had power to execute them there.

They pleaded the captain's promise of mercy. I then told them that I intended to go passenger in the ship, with all my men; but that they, if they went, could only go as prisoners; observing, however, that they might, if they chose it, stay in the island. This they gladly accepted, and I prepared to go on board the next day. The captain returning to





the ship, got every thing ready for my reception.

When he was gone, I talked to the men, told them my story, how I managed my household business; instructed them in all I knew, and gave them my best advice with regard to their behaviour to one another.

I divided the tools among them in this manner; to every man I gave a digging spade, a shovel, and a rake, as having no harrows or ploughs; and to every separate place a pick-axe, a crow, a broad axe, and a saw, with a store for a general supply, should any be broken or worn out. I left them also nails, staples, hinges, hammers, chissels, knives, scissars, and all sorts of tools and iron-work; and for the use of the smith, I gave him three tons of unwrought iron for a supply: and as to arms and ammunition, I stored them sufficiently io equip a little army. The next day I went on board the ship, taking Friday with me.





The next morning two of the men came swimming to the ship's side, desiring the captain to take them on board, though he hanged them afterwards, complaining mightily how barbarously the others used them. Upon which I prevailed with the captain to take them in, and being severely whipped and pickled, they proved more honest for the future. And so I bid farewell to the island, carrying along with me my money, parrot, umbrella, and goatskin-cap, setting sail December 12, 1686, after twenty-eight years, two months, and nineteen days residence, the same day and month that I escaped from Sallee, landing in England June 11, 1687, after thirtyfive years absence from my native country, which rendered me altogether a stranger to it. Sometime after I went to Lisboti, to see after my effects in the Brazils, and found the generous captain, who had been so much my friend, still alivo, and he put me in the way of recovering the produce





of my plantations. And a few months after, there arrived ships in the Tagut, with effects for my use, to the amount of £50,000, besides £1000 a year, which I expected to receive annually for my plantation.

And now resolved to harrass myself no more, I am preparing for a longer journey than all those, for I have lived seventytwo years, chequered with infinite variety, and have been taught sufficiently the value of retirement, and the blessing of ending my days in peace, and in the true worship of my Almighty Deliverer.



FINIS.



Wm. Dwton, juu. Printer, Holborn-Hill





CHILDREN'S BOOKS,

PRINTED BY

WILLIAM DARTON, Jun.



1. MARY AND HER CAT: in Words not exceeding Two Syllables; with beautiful Copperplates. Price 6d.

2. BARBAULD'S HYMNS: in Prose, for Children ; calculated to impress the Infant Mind with early Devotion ; embellished with beautiful Copper-plates. Price 6d.

3. THIRTY-TWO REMARKABLE PLACES in OLD ENGLAND ; with Eighteen Views engraved on Copper-plates, price Is.; or, with Nine Views, price 6d.

4. THE BOOK OF BEASTS ; beautifully Coloured, with a Description of each : adapted to the Capacities of Infant Minds: in Words of Two and Three Syllables. Price Is. 6d.

5. THE BOOK OF BIRDS; beautifully Coloured, with a Description of each; adapted to the Capacities of Infant Minds : in Words of Two and Three Syllables. Price Is. 6d.

6. LITTLE LESSONS FOR LITTLE FOLKS. By Mary Belson. Price 2s. 6d.

7. THE ALCHEMIST; by the Author of " Ornaments Discovered." Price 2s. 6d.

8. FOOD FOR THE YOUNG; adapted to the Mental Capacities of Children of Tende Years. By a Mother. Price 2s.

9. THE WINTER SCENE; to Amose and Instruct the Rising Generation. By M.H. Price is.





Children's Books, printed by Wm. Darton,jun.



10. THE METAMORPHOSES; or, Effects Of Education. By the Author of " Ornaments Discovered." Price 2s. 6d.

11. STORIES FOR CHILDREN; chiefly confined to Words of Two Syllables. By the Author of "Aunt Mary's Tales." lSmo. price Is. 6d. half-bound.

1?. PROFITABLE AMUSEMENT FOR CHILDREN, or Familiar Tales, combining useful Instruction with pleasing Entertainment. By the Author of" Learning better than House and Land." 18mo. price 2s. half-hound.

13. THE ADVENTURES OF A DONKEY. By Arabella Argus, author of "The Juvenile Spectator." 18mo. price 2s. 6d. half-bound.

14. THE YOUNG MORALIST; consisting of Allegorical and Entertaining Essays, in Prose and Verse, compiled from various Authors: chiefly designed to implant the Principles of Virtue and Morality in the Minds of Young Gentlemen and Ladies : adorned with Cuts, with a Poetical Portrait of the Editor, drawn from Life. Fifth edition, enlarged, with occasional Notes and Illustrations. By G. Wright, Esq. editor of " Mental Pleasures," &c. &c. l8mo. price 2s. 6d. halt-hound.

15. A NEW HISTORY OF ENGLAND, from the Invasion of Julius Cxsar to the present Time. Illustrated with Cupper-plates. Two Parts. Price Is. each.

16. THE ADVENTURES OF THOMAS TWO-SHOES : being a Sequel to that of " the Modern Goody Two-Shoes." By Mary Belson, author of " Industry and Idleness," &c. Price Is. with Copper-plates.





About this Book - From Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project to make the world's books discoverable online. It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume may appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the publisher to a library and finally to you.

Google Book Search has digitized millions of physical books and made them available online at http://books.google.com . The digitization at the most basic level is based on page images of the physical books. To make this book available as an ePub formated file we have taken those page images and extracted the text using Optical Character Recognition (or OCR for short) technology. The extraction of text from page images is a difficult engineering task. Smudges on the physical books' pages, fancy fonts, old fonts, torn pages, etc. can all lead to errors in the extracted text. Imperfect OCR is only the first challenge in the ultimate goal of moving from collections of page images to extracted-text based books. Our computer algorithms also have to automatically determine the structure of the book (what are the headers and footers, where images are placed, whether text is verse or prose, and so forth). Getting this right allows us to render the book in a way that follows the format of the original book.

Despite our best efforts you may see spelling mistakes, garbage characters, extraneous images, or missing pages in this book. Based on our estimates, these errors should not prevent you from enjoying the content of the book. The technical challenges of automatically constructing a perfect book are daunting, but we continue to make enhancements to our OCR and book structure extraction technologies.

We hope you'll enjoy these books as much as we do.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

Make non-commercial use of the files: We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for personal, non-commercial purposes.

Refrain from automated querying: Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

Maintain attribution: The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

Keep it legal: Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.



About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web at http://books.google.com





